the World Health Organization says staff
and patients still inide the besieged
NASA Hospital in hunas need to be
transferred elsewhere after being denied
entry for days wh staff evacuated 32
critically ill patients earlier this
week Israeli troops stormed the hospital
last week forcing Palestinians there to
flee some 130 severely injured patients
remain there though alongside at least
15 doctors and
nurses
situation is very bad and difficult and
O uh patients are without electricity
without oxygen the entire neighborhood
around here is damaged and destroyed the
hospital itself has no electricity has
no food has no water there's very few
doctors and nurses they're living here
in the premises working around the clock
you can think about the worst situation
ever you you multiply by 10 and this is
the the worst situation I have in in my
life is the debris the light working in
the darkness PA is
everywhere okay let's speak now to Dr T
Ahmed he's an emergency room physician
who spent three weeks volunteering at
Nasa Hospital in kanun back in January
of this year he joins us now live from
Chicago thank you for your time now
since you've been at the hospital the
Israeli Army has raided al- nassa after
a week-long Siege the UN described it as
a place of death I believe you been in
touch with people colleagues there what
have they been telling
you I mean they said the last week has
been miserable it's been a nightmare the
scenes that they're seeing are
traumatizing and they're asking for some
sort of help they're asking actually not
to be evacuated from the hospital but
for the hospital to function for the
lights to be turned back on for them to
get the medicines that they need to
treat the 150 patients that remain I
spoke to one of the uh general surgeons
there the last surgeon remaining in an
Nas Hospital Dr khid he sent a message
to a group of um of Physicians here in
the states and he just asked for us to
be able to advocate for the patients
that are there he says I'm staring at
patients and they need my help they need
my care and there's nothing that I can
do and he's in this impossible position
and this is something that was predicted
by the staff when I was there in January
as the tanks began getting closer to the
hospital complex they told me exactly
what would happen they predicted the
events as they unfolded they said at
first they'll demand an evacuation then
you'll see drones asking people to leave
then there will be snipers and it will
culminate in the a raid of the hospital
people being arrested and essentially
the hospital rendered dysfunctional or
inoperable tell us a bit about your
experience at Nasa Hospital in January I
mean what were your what were the
biggest challenges you were facing
then it was it was incredibly
overwhelming I mean NASA hospital after
shifa was rendered inoperable and raided
and Under Siege nasid was the last
remaining big hospital in the Gaza Strip
it was one of two referral hospitals so
the entire Gaza Strip was depending on
NASA to receive patients but also to be
able to run multiple operating rooms at
the same time I remember my first day
there just walking through the emergency
department and being overwhelmed by the
sheer volume of people that were there
keep in mind P yunus at the time in
January was the center of all military
operations for the Israelis and so we
were getting every single day multiple
waves of trauma patients coming through
the emergency department and going into
the operating room it was also people
who were Sheltering in and around the
hospital I mean tens 10,000 people were
Sheltering in and around the hospital
you saw tents everywhere and we had
supplies that we were using and we were
very short on very necessary things but
it was still operating and functioning
it was this Beacon of of of Health for
the entire Gaza STP and to watch it over
the course of several weeks slowly but
surely be you know have the same fate as
many of the hospitals in the Gaza Strip
it's it's heartbreaking but it's also
devastating I mean the Health Care
system has collapsed but Nas Hospital
shutting down it's a catastrophe people
will die because they're not going to
get the treatment that they need nasd
was so overwhelmed and so packed with
people while I was there we were
treating patients on the floor um we
were looking for mattresses to use for
patients because there were no more
hospital beds and so it's it was already
a tragic scenario but the hosp the
Physicians and the nurses at NAS were
doing an incredibly heroic job trying to
manage now this has become a Horror
Story it's become a nightmare I mean
it's just it's really depressing to
think about and now I'm concerned about
IFA hospitals will be next when you were
there at this hospital did you ever
worry about your
safety I mean I think we started really
realizing the seriousness of the
situation once we started hearing that
the bombing from the f-35s was a couple
of blocks away when we saw the tank
reach the perimeter of the hospital and
uh desecrate the cemetery that was
across from my window in the hospital
every single bomb the hospital would
shake and in fact while I was there one
of the windows in the emergency
department was shelled and broken there
were bullets that were sprayed on the
wall of the hospital I mean it was it
did not feel like a safe place and I
remember one of the evenings while I was
there that we decided to put the
mattresses on the window because we were
convinced that a bomb would would go off
and the shrapnel would fly through the
window killing us or injuring us and
many of the Physicians there had been at
previous hospitals they had fled from
shifa or they had come froma hospital
and they told us I mean they said that
this is this is kind of the script that
plays out is the military starts to get
closer and closer to the hospital and
then the hospital gets attacked and I
remember naively thinking no I mean I
don't think the hospital there's no way
that the hospital will be attacked I
mean I think shifa was such a a colossal
mistake it was so sad to see what
happened at shifa it's not going to
happen to NAS but they but the doctors
there were right and I was wrong um it
was it was definitely a concerning
situation while I was there and after I
left it only got worse Israel uh
repeatedly making the point that they
target hospitals in Gaza because Hamas
operate from them did you see any
evidence of
that I I saw quite the opposite I saw
many many kids in these hospitals I saw
many injured and wounded children
pregnant women I saw people that were
Sheltering and were really scared of the
consequences of War I didn't see
anything like that and I want to just
point out that these hospitals are so
important for the livelihood of the
people in the Gaza Strip it's not just
about treating the really injured people
or the sick people it's about having a
place where people can shelter people
can have some some access to some water
and having uh every now and then some
distribution of food so I think that's
the I think that's the way to frame what
these hospitals are actually doing
they're they're providing a refuge for
people who are scared who have lost
their homes who have lost family members
who are looking for food and water
because that's exactly what I saw in Nas
Dr th Ahmed thank you for sharing your
experience an emergency room physician
who spent three weeks volunteering at
Nasa Hospital back in January thank
thank you for having me